Stalin's plan, his script for the
Chinese works beautifully because when
the nationalists unite with the
communists to fight the Japanese, they
think he's also going to provide
soldiers. They don't get it. Once
they're in, Russia is out of this thing.
Shanka goes roaring up China. He reaches
[music] his home base in Shanghai.
Pause. And he turns his guns on the
communists and just massacres them in
droves. If you add up all the territory
that the Russians took from the Chinese
sphere of influence, it's greater than
all US territory east of the
Mississippi. Russia has posed
existential threat to its neighbors
forever. There are so many neighbors you
have never heard of because they've
disappeared from the pages of history,
courtesy of the Russians. People are
worried about whether there's going to
be an enduring relationship with uh
China and Russia. And if you look at
this picture, uh, the relations look
more glacial than cordial and the little
one's hauling on the arm of the big one.
And one wonders about that. So, um, it
turns out my expertise is on Russo
Chinese relations and that's what I
studied in graduate school. My
dissertation was a history of their
border from the opium wars, the mid-9th
century until outer Mongolia was uh
snatched from the Chinese sphere of
influence and parked in the Russian
sphere uh in the 1920s. So, it's fun to
talk about this particular topic. Before
I get going, I'm going to do some
terminology. I'm going to use the word
Russia to refer to the Tsarist, Soviet,
and modern periods. The same way that
you use France to describe its many
monarchies and many republics, the
Boleviks thought they were special, so
they came up with special words for
special people, Soviet, Soviet Union.
But it turns out they were temporary,
and Russia is the enduring thing. So
that's it on terminology. Before I
speculate on what the future is going to
look like, our only database that we
have is whatever happened from this
second backwards. What people call
history, but it's just whatever is in
the past. That's it. That's our
database. And so I'm going to look at
when Russia was strong and China was
weak from the mid-9th century to the mid
20th century. Then the reversal of the
power balance and then in the recent
period when China has been strong and
Russia weak, China and Russia actually
discovered each other late in their
histories. It was the early part of
their last dynasties when the Russians
were after fury
lucrative in those days and that brings
them out to the Pacific. But their
relations were only episodic until we
get to the mid 19th century where which
is where my story is going to begin. So
in the 18th century, China was strong,
Russia was weak, but that one doesn't
last very long. And both empires
followed the rules for continental
empire. And if you want to survive in a
continental world, both that's what both
of them historically have been. You
don't want to have two front wars
because you have multiple neighbors, any
one of them that can come in at any
time. And if they gang up on you, that's
trouble. So you take on one at a time.
Also, you don't want any great powers on
the borders. This is the fundamental
problem with their relationship is
because today's friend can be tomorrow's
foe. And that is truly that's
problematic. So, what do you do to solve
that problem? When you take on your
neighbors sequentially, you set them up
to fail. You destabilize the rising and
just the uh failing and you set up
buffer zones in between and you wait the
opportune moment to pounce and absorb.
And of that is Vladimir Putin's game.
But if you play this game, you're
surrounding yourself by failing states
because you're either busy destabilizing
them or ingesting them. So the curious
might ask, how do Russia are Russia and
China unlucky with all the very
dysfunctional pl places that surround
them or are they complicit? Also, there
are no enduring alliances in this world
because the neighbors figure it out that
the hegemonic power offers nothing but
trouble in the long term. And there's
also no council on when to stop
expanding. So both Russia and China are
known for overextending, overdoing it.
And then that may help explain some of
their periodic implosions over their
long and bloody histories. Very high
mortality rates before before you
dismiss this paradigm. You've seen it
operating in real time in Syria and
Ukraine. There are people who do this.
uh and and it also explains why all
those ancient ruins are ruins. This sort
of warfare is ruinous. But anyway, it
lies at the basis of many of the great
civilizations of Eurasia. This is how
they did things. All right. So, I'm
going to start my story in the mid 19th
century when the Chinese were beset by a
whole series of rebellions that just
about wrecked them. And the Russians
take advantage of all of this. Remember
the second rule of continental empires,
no great power neighbors. And the
Russians repeatedly derail the rise of
China by scripting the Chinese to do
things that are remarkably detrimental
to Chinese interests, but pretty good
for Russian interests. And it takes the
Chinese a long time to figure it out.
They have governments coming and going
in this period. Uh, it's a difficult
period, but they eventually figure it
out by the time Mao reunifies China in
1949. So, I'm going to go through each
of those examples in turn, starting with
a really big one, which are the Opium
Wars. This is when Britain and France
are coming at China in order to force
China to trade on their terms. And this
corresponds with the two biggest
rebellions of China's period of
rebellions, the Taiping and the Nin
Rebellion. So here's a big chart that's
a simplified chart. The rebellions
actually start in the late 18th
centuries. The rebellion's a misnomer.
These are civil wars. Either people are
like minority peoples who want out of
empire, they want to secede. Other
people who want to overthrow the
government in Beijing. The peak period
is in red. The really big ones are in
white. So China has got that two-front
war problem, right? It's got Europeans
coming at them plus all of this. In
fact, the Chinese have so many fronts,
they don't know how to deal with it. So
the Russians come on in to the Chinese
and say, "Hey, we can deal with the uh
British and French for you and solve
that problem and you can deal with all
the internal stuff. However, we need to
have you sign a couple pieces of paper
for us." The Treaty of Aun of 1858 and
the Treaty of Ping of 1860, what do they
do? They seed to Russia large swaths of
territory in Central Asia and the
Pacific coastline. and theQing uh
dynasty, they're vague on geography.
They're beset by these other things.
They don't understand that Europeans
think these pieces of paper are
permanent things. And they figure that
once they put their house back in order,
they're going to come back and get the
territory later. Okay. The second
example of ruinous Russian mediation
that is going to uh keep China uh in
turmoil. So in the first SinoJapanese
war, Japan trounces China, boots them
from their tributary in Korea and then
the Japanese also want some territory on
the Laoong Peninsula that isn't labeled
very well there. But anyhow, um what the
Chinese do is they go to the Russians to
help them counterbalance Japan so that
Japan doesn't take this territory,
Chinese territory in the Asian mainland.
Russia gets its buddies France and
Germany, the so-called triple
intervention to gang up in Japan. And
Japan looks at it three great powers. I
don't think so. So they they bail. So
that for the from the Chinese point of
view, so far so good. Except what the
Russians promptly do is take for
themselves the very territory that had
just been denied to Japan. And the story
gets worse because all the European
powers or many of them plus Japan come
in and they carve out big concession
areas throughout China. So that China is
not going to have full sovereignty over
its territory for several generations.
Right? So instead of one relatively
small Japanese concession area, they get
foreigners everywhere. And so think
about second rule continental uh empire,
no great uh power neighbors. Not
happening while this is going on. Well,
the Boleviks come to power and then
they're going to apply these rules as
well. When they do come to power,
they're very weak because Russia's been
devastated by World War I and then the
Bolsheiks don't win their own bitter
civil war until 1922. And so then as
now, they relied on a really cheap but
incredibly effective strategy of
strategic communication. The Russians
really understand uh other people's
emotional life and what sets them at
odds with each other and they know just
how to uh to serve out the propaganda
that sets people at each other's
throats. and they're going to their
propaganda is going to help the Chinese
really despise the Japanese and the uh
Europeans while Russia's even greater
predations, the ones you've already
seen, go unnoticed. So, here's Lev
Karakhan. He was a deputy foreign
minister. In 1919, he sends um a missive
uh his Karakhan manifesto to the Chinese
foreign ministry and he says, "Hey,
we're not imperialists. We're Boleviks.
We're going to return all the the lands
from those unequal treaties and be your
friend from ever more. Unlike all the
other evil imperialist powers, we're not
like that anymore. And so the Chinese
are looking at this and thinking, "Wow,
here are the Boleviks who've gotten rid
of their imperialistic government.
They're uh putting together their
shattered land. And so this offers hope
to the Chinese that they can do
likewise. and it's a model potentially
to follow and a mentor who might help
them. Uh except here's the detail. When
the Bolshiks started doing better in
their civil war, they really dialed back
what their offer was. The original offer
was tear up treaties, China gets all
territory back, no payments necessary.
under the new version of the Karakhan
manifesto which the Russian foreign
ministry goes and and uh telegraphs to
the Chinese foreign ministry. I've seen
the document or at least a certain copy
of it in the archives in Taiwan. They
they send it back and say we're willing
to talk about these things. We're going
to hold some negotiations. Well, the
facts are they didn't return these
concessionaries to the mid 20th century
1950s after the Westerners had returned
almost all of their concession areas.
And this is not trivial. And when we
think of concession areas in the age of
imperialism in China, you think of
British ones, right? Hong Kong. Well,
Hong Kong isn't actually very big. The
reason you know about Hong Kong is it
makes lots of money, or at least it used
to. And the Russian concession areas
were huge. Didn't make money. Nothing.
What else is new? But the Russians had
by far the largest concession area of
any other country. But from the Karakhan
manifesto is the origin of the myth of
Sinos Soviet friendship that the
Russians somehow treated the Chinese
nicely and the foreign ministry
officials who would have known better.
Their government is overthrown within
the decade and presumably these
documents just gather dust in the
archives. All right, my fourth example
of derailing China's rise concerns the
first united front between the Chinese
nationalist and Chinese Communist Party.
Here's the leader of the nationalist
party and also leader of its ar ar ar ar
ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar
ar ar ar armies, General Lissimo
Shankai. Well, he led the northern
expedition reunifying China at least
nominally, by either defeating or
co-opting all those warlords there. You
can see the different colors of the m
where the major warlords were. And
previous South China attempts to do this
or or to secede from China, one or the
other, had failed for lack of a
proficient military. But Russia changes
that. It provides aid, arms and
expertise and structures and things to
found the Huoa military academy which is
in Canton or Guangjo. And that uh
institution is going to uh educate the
officers both communist and nationalists
who would lead uh not only this but some
of their civil civil war area officers
that make this reunification of China
possible. But the Russians had a price.
give them give the nationalists the aid,
but the nationalists then have to let
the communists into the nationalist
party. That's what the United Front is.
So, this all uh coincides with a bitter
succession struggle in Russia. This is
the problem with dictatorships. They
really don't do succession well. It's
why elections are so convenient. Uh
instead, you have Stalin and Trosky
going at it of which one was going to be
the big cheese. Stalin is all about
socialism in one country. He thinks that
Russia ought to f focus on its own
internal development. Whereas Trosi says
nonsense, we need to focus on world
revolution because only if there are
sister revolutions abroad can ours. So
while this is all going on um the
Chinese communists really want to get
out of that united front. Why? because
it puts them in close proximity to the
army which is controlled by the
nationalists and they're getting worried
whether they're about to get killed and
the Russians say no no no no it's go
good good you stay in that united front
so they do shankai goes roaring up China
I've shown you the map he reaches his
pretty home base in Shanghai pause and
he turns his guns on the communists and
just massacres them in droves and this
is when Mao has to think of a rural
strategy to power because the urban
strategy is no longer feasible. Well,
once this happens, Stalin can use it to
just trounce Trosky in the internal
power struggle because it's look see
revolution in one country doesn't work
abroad and a lot of Chinese died proving
Stalin's point. All right, another
example where Russia literally derails
the rise of China. There's a railway
system there. We're going to talk rails.
In the Russo-Japanese war of 1904 1905,
Japan wins it and gets from Russia which
built all these things in uh Chinese
territory the southern half of that
railway net in lie of an indemnity. Uh
Japan invests massively in railways,
infrastructure and apparently in local
politicians. But the ruling warlord
apparently wasn't sufficiently attentive
to Japanese needs. So they assassinated
him in 1928. that this is his son Jang
Shuang who the following year 1929
decides he wants his railways back from
Russia. What does Russia do? It's not
either version of the Kakhan manifesto.
The Russians deploy over 100,000 troops,
tanks, airplanes, the works and just
pound this man. And so they the Russians
keep their railways. So um if you want
to delay the rise of China, that sort of
thing delays the rise of China. Um but
now for the first rule of continental
empire, no two-front wars. You get to
you go move fast forward to the 1930s
and Stalin thinks he may very well face
a two-front war with Germans in the west
and Japanese in the east. Why would he
think such thoughts? This thing, the
anti-common pact, common is short for
communist international. It is the
Soviet outreach program. And it's signed
in 1936 between the Japanese and the
Germans. And Stalin goes, "Uhoh, they're
after me." And so he plays every one of
his China cards and he holds lots of
them because then this is also part if
you want to disintegrate the neighbors
in order to delay their rise. Well then
you fund all sides of their uh civil
wars and any side in between because you
just want them to go at it. So he plays
every card he's got and what he wants
are the nationalists to stop fighting
the communist vice versa and unite to
fight the Japanese. and they're willing
to do this provided Stalin provides
conventional aid which he does but they
think he's also going to provide
soldiers. They don't get it. Once
they're in, Russia is out of this thing.
And Stalin's plan, his script for the
Chinese and Japanese works beautifully
because when the nationalists unite in
the second united front with the
communists going back to the dark side,
the Japanese are apoplelectic and this
is when they do the massive escalation
in 1937 and they are off to
overextension into parts due south of
Russia. So this two-front Japanese
German war never materialized. Stalin
very successful, Chinese less so because
uh the Chinese are fighting the Japanese
so the Russians don't have to and that
comes at the price of millions of
deaths, millions of refugees. It that
does indeed derail China's rise yet
again. Next example, per the Yaltta
agreement, Russia finally gets in the
war in Asia about time. And at the in
the very final weeks and uh this August
storm when they the Russians deploy like
1.5 million soldiers, it's one of the
largest military operations of World War
II. And then they rapidly take Manuria
and they also do some that that would be
the normal thing. But here's the
abnormal thing. Um they also take away
Manuria's industrial base. That would
not normally be what you do to someone.
They take 83% of the electrical power
equipment, take it home to Russia, not
turning lights on in Manuria. 86% of
mining, 82% of cement making, 80% of
metal working equipment. Plus, they take
640,000
Japanese PS to be slave labor for
decades, if they ever get home at all.
And they also take the northern islands,
which are still under dispute to today.
But if you think about it, if you're
going to do indemnities or reparations
or whatever this is, China had been
fighting Japan in one form or another
for 15 long years. Russia comes in at
the cameo performance at the very end.
So if they're indemnities to be paid for
whatever Japan did uh in this war,
surely China, not Russia, should have
been the recipient for all this stuff.
Uh in addition another example so uh not
only does Stalin walk away with the
industrial base but he walks away with
Mongolia as well. How does that work?
The Yalta agreement also stipulates that
the status quo shall be maintained in
Mongolia. So then you have to look at
well what was the status quo? It was
called Russian sphere of influence in
the north, Chinese continuing control in
the south. um that Mongolia, which had
always been both those places, uh had
been part of theQing Empire, never been
part of the Russian Empire. And
moreover, Stalin had already taken
Tanatua in 1944, and it looks small in
this map, but it's bigger than England,
had lots of gold, which the Soviets have
monetized long ago. So if you add up
all the territory that the Russians took
from the Chinese sphere of influence
from the 1858 treaty of Aigun and 1860
treaty of Ping, fast forward to
detaching outer Mongolia from the
Chinese sphere of influence. Here's what
it really is. It's greater than all US
territory east of the Mississippi. This
is not your normal land grab. So talk
about derailing somebody. That would do
it. Um, to be fair to the Russians, they
did, albeit slowly, turn over all this
Japanese stockpiled military equipment
in Manuria, turned it over to the
communists, and they also, albeit
belatedly, they trained them how to use
the equipment and also how to run the
Manurion railway system. And the Chinese
communists, as a rural uh peasant
movement, how would they know how to do
these things? They wouldn't. And it
allows uh this conventional aid and
logistics of being able to move people
around. It transforms the communists
from a lightly uh armed guerilla
movement to a very heavily armed
conventional forces capable for the
showdown phase of the Chinese civil war.
So like the Juan Poa military academy
this is essential aid for the communist
victory. So it's in the com neither the
communists or the nationalists compare
complain about the de-industrialization
of Manuria
and the communists probably traded that
industry for all the conventional aid
that they got and the nationalists are
trading that and also uh outer Mongolian
independence for a promise from Stalin
not to aid the communists which a
promise that he promptly breaks. So ma
starts to figure out that something is
up here. So when he's on a roll in his
offensives in the civil war, there's
really bitter fighting and the real
movement in the last phase of post 1940
phase of the Chinese civil war is in
1948. That year Mao just moves and he is
roaring down south and he's about to get
the Yangza river and Stalin's like, "Hey
buddy, take a break at the Yangza. Don't
exhaust yourself." and now ignores it
because whereas Stalin might have wanted
to keep um nationalist rump states south
of the Yangza River uh yielding a a
divided China in keeping with weakening
your neighbor. Uh Mao is not remotely
interested in that. And here's my 10th
example which is the Korean War.
If you look at the Korean War, the first
year is a war of movement. There's up
and down up and down the peninsula. It's
it's unbelievable how much movement
there is. But then it's stalemates for
the last two years. And you think, well,
what's going on? Why do why don't they
settle the war sooner because both sides
are are taking incredible losses? Well,
here's how it goes. Once China
intervenes in the Korean War and once
they halt various offensives to um start
peace talks, the Chinese do incredible
tunnel work and probably the North
Koreans as well and build an incredible
tunnel system. So, it means the South
Koreans and the UN forces are never
going to get anywhere near the Soviet
border ever again. And from that moment
on, Stalin thinks he's got a low-risk,
highreward strategy where he's going to
weaken the United States and delay the
rise of China. So, what's not to love
about fighting to the last Chinese in
Korea? Stalin thinks this is great and
it's going to Chinese
development. Um, it's also because China
is so isolated by [snorts] this war, it
has no international friends but Russia.
It's going to tie China to uh Russia
ever more firmly and give Russia
breathing space to rebuild after World
War II while its Western enemies are
wasting time in Korea. So um if you put
it all together, Chinese civil war,
Korean war of Russia's on and off aid on
and off again aid to the Russ uh to uh
different sides in the civil war, his
double dealing with bond and what
happened with Outer Mongolia and the
Manurion industrial base, Stalin's
advice to Mao to halt at the Yangza and
then he's fighting to the last Chinese
and Korea. This is all consistent with
the second rule of continental empire,
no great power uh neighbors. All right.
Once Stalin dies, finest day of his
life, um he there's never as strong a
leader in Russia again. And by this
time, Mao has figured out that the
Russians don't want a strong China. Uh
he has to b his time for a while, but he
understands what is going on. And Mao
has a growing list of gripes. It's not
only he didn't like Stalin's tributary
treatment, but also uh Mao thinks with
his resume that he should become uh the
leader of international communism and
Stalin's successor Nikita Kushchev. It's
like no way. And Kushchev has does not
have remotely Mao's uh resume. Ra Mao
has just put together a continent uh by
reunifying China. That's not remotely
what Kristoff's ever been able to do.
And Mao also can't stand either
Kushoff's domestic or foreign policy.
Domestically, Krushche is all about
denalization. Well, Mao doesn't like
that. He's got a cult of personality. He
doesn't want to do things like that. And
then Khushoff is interested in peaceful
coexistence with the West or at least
nominally. Whereas Mao is in the midst
of the cultural revolution, which is
based on a virantly anti-western foreign
policy. And then they're forever
squabbbling about who's aiding Vietnam
in the North Vietnam and the Vietnam
War. and who's going to get credit for
it. So all of that's going on now.
Khrushchev has his own gripes about the
Chinese. He looks around at the United
States. United States has got basing all
over the world. Its allies allow the
United States to have bases. And China
has hardly any Russian bases, these
leftover concession areas. And China
wants them back. And TR Kush can't
understand this. And then what he really
can't understand are the two Taiwan
Strait crises of 1954 and 1958 where Mao
starts lobbing ordinance on nationalist
islands that are very close to mainland
shores. And Kushchoff is apoplelectic
because Mao hasn't given him any
advanced warning. And by the way, this
sort of thing could trigger some of the
security claw clauses of the Sinos
Soviet friendship treaty with uh nuclear
followon effects. And then when Stu and
while this is going on when uh
Khrushchev wants to have a combined
subfleet vase, if we're going to take
all these rifts, we need to have subs in
different places. A mouse says no way.
And then Krushche has set up and said,
well, you're not going to get the plans
for the atomic bomb. Okay. And the whole
thing becomes public in 1960 with uh
anger all around. And the two Russia and
China squabbled incessantly over the
Vietnam War. And the North Vietnamese
were interested in getting maximum aid
for both from both which it did. And
they begged the Chinese to allow the
Russians to ship things overland through
China. So the Chinese felt obliged to do
it. Um but the terms of that overland
trade were just uh a food for all kinds
of squabbbling. It just didn't end. So
the story of the reversal and the
balance of power between Russia and
China arose from multiple factors.
Doesn't happen all at once. It is both a
story of China's rise and of Russia's
decline. And step one for China is
getting its own atomic weapon which it
does in 1964 so that it can get itself
free of Soviet bondage. And so this is
in 1964 after they've detonated that
bomb where Ma goes, "Okay, there are too
many places occupied by the Soviet
Union. The Russians took everything they
could. We have not yet presented an
account uh for this list of stolen
territory, all the territory I've shown
you. Uh we want it back." The Russians
jaw drops panic. And the Chinese then
are much more aggressive about what they
consider to be their territorial rights.
Uh, and there is a a border war over
territories and in particular this one
island, Jumba Damsky Island in the Amore
River. All right, here's how riverine
borders work, international ones. Uh,
under international law, the border is
the foul, which is the center of the
main channel of whatever the river is.
And Russia had followed that with its
European borders, not with China. It
claimed both banks of the Amir. Well,
the Chinese are fed up with that and
they take Jumba uh island and uh the
Russians are furious and they come to
the United States and they say, "Would
it be okay if we nuke these people?" And
we're like, "No."
So then the Russians scratch their head
and they come back and they go, "Okay,
[snorts] would it be okay if we use
conventional weapons to blow up their
nuclear stuff?" And we go, "No, still
not okay." And M gets it. the one that
wants to nuke you is your primary
adversary. So there is a reshuffleling
of the primary adversaries. So that
formerly the United States was the
primary adversary of both China and
Russia. So that would be a reason for
them to cooperate. Well, now they're
primary adversaries for each other and
the United States can play the swing
thing with all of this. And for Russia,
um, it's really devastating having China
as an enemy because it's going to have
to deploy mechanized nuclear armed
troops all along its really long Chinese
border, Central Asia, the works. And
it's already doing this with its
European borders and occupying Eastern
Europe, which garrisoning costs are
significant. Imagine if this country had
to put those kinds of forces on our long
Canadian and Mexican borders. it'd be
bankrupting and their economy was and
remains a fraction of ours. But um this
breaking up of the earlier version of
the bromance uh allows the United States
to play the swing role and then we
cooperate. Both Nixon and Mao think
ganging up on Russia would be a good
thing and overextending Russia
financially by overextending it
militarily with all this these armaments
and things. So in addition what's going
as part of the China's rise are internal
reforms under Deng Xiaoping when he
abandons certain communist principles of
economic management and gets much more
productive agricultural sector and
industry and commerce. And so China's
running doubledigit growth rates for
about 20 years with significant
compounding effects. Okay, that's the
story of China's rise. Now for this
dystopian alternate universe of Russian
decline, you have pictured here on the
left is Leoned Brev who apparently had a
really a stroke in 1976 that permanently
impaired his thinking and which his
death in 1982 finished off and then um
he was replaced by a Yuri Dropov who own
health was uh pretty powerless and he
dies within two
And then Constantine Chernenko uh barely
makes it a year before he's dead. I
mean, it sort of sounds like us, but
anyway, uh [laughter]
it doesn't work well. So, if you look at
Soviet growth statistics, they're really
good. Right after the end of World War
II, they're busy rebuilding. But then
when you get to the mid70s, they're
going into terminal decline. So when
Gorbachev comes to power in 1985, Soviet
growth rates have been either 1 to 2%
less than US growth rates for the
preceding decade and the compounding
effects of that are pretty horrendous.
In addition, other problems. Leonard
Brev was in power for 18 long years. And
not only did he collect cars, that was
apparently the the the go-to gift for
him, but in addition, he was collecting
a bunch of non-performing pals across
the third world because this is
manifesting Russian power, but it's
expensive and he doesn't have much of an
economy to pay for it. And if you look
at oil prices, they're very much
associated with the decline of the
Soviet Union, rise of Vladimir Putin.
And it's because in the Soviet era, uh,
government budgets, uh, relied as much
as 55% on oil or energy revenues. And
so, um, piggy banks are going to shrink
if oil oil prices aren't doing very
well. And so, Gorbachev repeatedly said,
you know, we can't live this way
anymore. And so, he wanted and he did
initiate political and economic reforms
to try to save communism. except he
really um ruined the sclerotic patient
doing what he did and there are massive
territorial implications for what he did
and uh it's the loss of empire in
Eastern Europe and also the loss of the
ethnically based constituent republics
of the Soviet Union. So I'm going to
show you this um territorial Russia's
territorial odyssey in maps. So this is
38. It is before the Molotov ribbon
pact, Nazi Soviet pact, where they're
dividing up Poland and parts of of
Eastern Europe, Nazis and Soviets of
what they want. This is before then. But
by the time you get to the end of the
war, Russia's got the Baltic states.
It's got Khenrad. It's got all of
Belarus, all of Ukraine, and then of
course it gets Eastern Europe. Well,
with Gorbachev effort, he works his
magic. You're down to Khenrad.
Okay, that's where Russians stage a lot
of weapons nowadays and apparently dump
a lot of toxic waste. Uh so that's what
cleaning's all about. Uh so it was
significant. So that at the end of uh
1991 when Russia's lost everything,
they're down to a much diminished rum
state and then uh followed by years of
uh instability in Russia.
>> Mercury is my banking platform and I
basically use it to run this whole
business. I use it to invoice my
sponsors and to automatically pay bills.
I even have payroll set up with
recurring payments going out to all my
editors. But maybe it's not intuitive
why it's so helpful to have all of these
things run through the same platform.
So, let me give you an example. As my
business has gotten more complicated in
order to figure out how much money I'll
have in a week or a month in the future,
I need to know not just how much cash we
have on hand, but also what our open
invoices are with sponsors and what
bills we owe to other people. With
Mercury, I can easily figure out this
number by taking our current cash
balance and then netting it out with all
our open invoices and upcoming bills all
added up, which Mercury tallies for me.
And this is actually super valuable. You
know, sometimes I like to make crazy
YOLO AI bets and Mercury makes me feel
super confident about exactly how much
money I can take out of our business
while still having enough leftover to
pay bills and to pay taxes. Visit
mercury.com to join me and 200,000 other
entrepreneurs who use Mercury. Mercury
is a financial technology company, not a
bank. Banking services provided through
Choice Financial Group, Column NA and
Evolve Bank and Trust members FDIC.
>> When Russians measure
um well they agree uh on that their
country always has been, always should
be, always will be a great power, but
they don't measure it in wealth.
>> [snorts]
>> um because their wealth has always been
uh much less than their westward
neighbors although they often confiscate
the wealth of other people. So what they
measure their strength greatness is in
vast territorial extent and the ability
to run rough shot over others and make
them do whatever it is Russia wants. And
also when they look at their security
they also look at it this way is that we
need this vast territorial extent to be
secure. Um, but they never turn it
around. So they're always worried about
other people invading them to think,
well, do you suppose we pose a threat to
anybody else? They never turn it around
that way. Except Russia has posed
existential
uh threat to its neighbors forever.
There are so many neighbors you have
never heard of because they've
disappeared from the pages of history,
courtesy of the Russians. Let's go to
the medieval period where Russia starts
out as the princely state of Muscovi,
Moscow. Well, it wipes out the other
princely states. There was Noarod the
great uh was the more progressive place.
They wiped that place out. UPS Ross,
there are a lot of other places. And
then later they're uh eliminating the
Kates of Central Asia. These are states.
It's a different way of organizing
yourself. But the Kate of Crimea, Kazan,
Astrahan, Kokan, Kiva, Bohara, they get
rid of all of it. And then there's been
this repeated vivisecting of European
neighbors, Ukraine, Poland, Lithuania,
Sweden, and Finland of taking their
territory one bite at a time. And you
can see it going on today. And the
Russians just don't see it. Um that if
you do this to other people, um this is
why at the end of the Cold War, everyone
is stampeding into NATO. It's not some
conspiracy. It's just what the Russians
have done to them. And now I'm going to
illustrate Poland's fate to show what
happens when you're surrounded by
rapacious continental empires. Three
partitions of Poland in the 18th
century. This is when Prussia, Austria,
and Russia are taking things. The
Russians say, "But we didn't take Polish
territory. They're taking the Polish
Empire." That's a technicality. Um, and
uh, if you wonder why Poles cannot stand
Russians, it would be this. And it would
also be uh the genocide laced occupation
of Poland that went on for several
generations after World War II. And oh,
part of that Yaltta again, the Russians
insisted on moving Poland 200 kilometers
to the west. That is not the normal
thing to do to a country. So it's deep
into German territory. So Russia can go
eat a big part of Poland. Then Russian
decides it's going to cleanse the whole
place, ethnically cleansed. So German's
going to live in Germany. Poles are
going to live in Poland. Ukrainian going
to live in Ukraine and millions of
people this is a war devastated Europe
where there's no way to take care of
refugees are being sent hither and yan
and lots of them are dying and for the
first time in their histories um
Czechoslovakia Germany Hungary Poland
Ukraine they become ethnically
homogeneous states and then Poland um
Hungary and uh Czechoslovakia
uh require Russian troops to hang on to
some of their uh current gains. So um a
lot of things uh go on here. If you
compare to what the West is doing in the
United States, the United States has a
Marshall Plan. You've heard of it where
the United States is pouring aid into
our Western allies to restore them after
the war. Well, this is what Russia's
doing. A they've in they've won the war,
so their troops are there, but they
never take their troops home. Then
they're busy running coups. Then they're
busy shooting uh anyone who disagrees
with them or they send them to labor
camps, whatever they're going to do. And
then they redistribute every form of
wealth there is either through
nationalization or collectivization,
right? Uh and uh they're imposing this
really uh non-functioning e economic
model on these people. It's called
communism. It doesn't work. Uh so you
wonder why Eastern Europeans aren't
thrilled about a repeat of this? Well,
come on. All right. Moreover, story gets
better. The people who made all this
happen include this charmer uh some of
the most toxic people from the Soviet
Union. Andre Vishinsky who goes to
Romania, lucky Romanias, he was running
the show trials that were killing the uh
sending the original Bolevik leaders
summary execution. What does he do when
he gets in Romania? Well, he appoints
the ministers of justice war in the
interior. If you do that, you control
the courts, army, and police. And then
you can start expropriating everything
and uh nationalizing things and you can
start eliminating other parties and you
make uh Romania trade only with the
Soviet Union. Okay. All right. Another
toxic personality, Marshall Clement
Villov, who he's another part of the
A-list uh purge team. What had he done?
Signed loads of execution warrants to
his military colleagues, officers uh
during the great purges. What a great
guy. He's in Hungary. Lucky people. um
he's not quite as competent as the other
one because in the elections of 1945 in
in Hungary, the small holders party
wins. Oops, they aren't communists. He
doesn't ever make that mistake again.
Then he's busily appointing communist
ministers to different ministries, the
land reform, taking over the civil
service, getting the propaganda up and
running, uh taking over uh youth and
women's groups to infiltrate that way
and arresting um all sorts of
non-communist politicians before he
holds the 1947 elections, which of
course the communists win. And then
afterwards there's a really big purge
which um 10% of the population faces
tribunals. think of that if this room
10% of you going to tribunals because
Russians are in town. Okay. Uh Russia
had a template for block building. It's
it's this is a I'm giving you the
details because you get a sense of how a
continental empire runs business. So the
Russians looked at how when Italy
surrendered to western part of the
western allies that they basically just
ran the show in Italy. So the Russians
are go, well, we're going to when we
accept surreners, we're going to run the
show in Eastern Europe. But the Russians
want to take advantage of the absolute
turmoil that wars cause. Also, wars
often lead to war economies where you've
got a lot of centralized government
control to run the war effort. So the
Russians want to leverage that one. And
then they've got this big red army
presence. Use all of those things, which
they do. And here's their template.
They're controlling the power
ministries. What are they? Defense and
interior. If you do that, you're going
to monopolize coercion and eliminate
your opposition. If you control the
justice and information ministries,
you're going to arrest or kill at will.
And then you control all the stories
that are never told about this. And then
if you control agriculture, particularly
in those days, you're going to buy a lot
of allegiance by redistri redistributing
other people's lands. And that's going
to wipe out class enemies,
collaborators, all sorts of people you
don't like and the uh original elite
that have been running rural areas. And
they also had uh uh a story that they
told about this. It's the big lie.
Remember communism? It what is the the
the really bad people in the communist
story of how we all live? It's the
imperialists, right? Imperialism is
really bad. Well, I've just shown you
that Russians were the greatest
practitioners of imperialism of the 20th
century. And they're doing this right as
Western imperialists are giving up their
colonies. And yet this big lie, the big
fiction that the Russians are somehow
nice guys, they're using democratic
forms. Like they don't eliminate Poland
as a state as the Zars had done, it's
still called Poland, but it's a fiction
that it's independent. It's not. And
there's a fiction that they they hold
elections, but they're not democratic.
We already know the outcome. And uh it's
a dictatorship in reality, and they're
just purging the place. And I mean,
they're killing lots of Eastern
Europeans. So if you think Eastern
Europeans don't remember this, they most
certainly do. And then there is a a more
regional template for how you do this.
I've already talked about ethnic
cleansing. They did that. And then they
tried moving countries, right? Poland to
the west, Mongolia I haven't talked
about. It was to the east in a Chinese
territory. And then they want to take
some stepping stones for later
expansion. So that's what Khenrad is all
about. Another one is Muldova. that is
territory between Romania and Russia on
very important river systems and
Muldova's got problems with a place
called Transnistria which the Russians
have poached. So that story is still
ongoing and also places like Azerbaijan
it's split between Iran and uh well now
it's independent Azerbaijan but it was
split with the Soviet Union and then
there the the United States of Germany,
Korea, Mongolia and China. You want all
your neighbors quarreling over their
borders so that Russia can then set the
terms and that it can nibble them away a
bite at a time or if it can take a whole
thing good for them. So Russian uh
national identity is not only about
empire territorial extent. It's also has
some big ideas attached to it. Uh an
ideology that somehow this territorial
expansion is either progressive uh
beneficial or positive. And it's a a
myth. So under the Zars,
the ideology was this third Rome of the
Russian Orthodox Church. Third Rome was
in Moscow. I know this is news to you.
I'll explain how it works. So there's
the Rome we all know about the Rome.
Rome that was Rome number one. The the
one where the pope is. Uh the Rome
number two according to the Russians has
to do with the Byzantine Empire and that
was Constantinople or Istanbul. So when
that falls, the Russians go, "Tada! It's
Moscow." Not really, but um they use
this Russian Orthodoxy and spread uh the
Russian Orthodox Church back in the day
uh deep into Eastern Europe. So when the
communists get in, they're not spreading
Russian Orthodoxy, they're spreading
communism. The problem for Putin is
today neither communism nor Russian
orthodoxy are marketable ideologies. So
he's just stuck with being a really big
place. That's where uh his little focus
is. And Russia has a nightmare scenario.
They don't always win these wars. They
lose uh quite often. And the Mongol yoke
or the yellow peril, their terminology,
not mine, uh is the 13th century when
the Mongols just swept in and the
Russian elites became tax collectors for
the Mongols. An extractive role that is
endured. You think about Russians, they
extract resources, their own other
peoples, but they're not known for
producing wealth. It's just resource
extraction. And this is some of the
legacy of all of that one. And um the
Russians have also suffered devastating
defeats to Napoleon in World War I and
World War II that just devastated
Western Russia. So they've had bad
times. And in our own time, Putin is
dumping all of his ordinance on Ukraine,
leaving Siberia wide open to China's
ambitions. So if he keeps it keeps the
game up, he may well wind up with a
Chinese yoke and his nightmare will be
there for him. The Chinese also had
their own big ideas, not religious ideas
uh or empire, but about civilization
itself. the idea uh his traditionally
that the Chinese believe there's only
one civilization that would be theirs.
It's based on Confucianism. Uh that
would be a world order unto itself. And
that worked for them for a couple
thousand years. And there are certain
pillars of uh legitimacy that have
endured or probably originating this but
enduring one. And one is ethical rule.
Well, that's gone for the Communist
Party. Let's try the next one. Economic
prosperity. Whoops. going fast. That
leaves the communists today with
territorial expansion. Well, that's
ongoing with territory incursions into
India, South China Sea island building,
and then all these gathering threats to
Taiwan. And in part, what's going on is
the Communist Party wants everyone to he
wants to play the nationalism card the
same way Putin is. If you haven't gotten
anything else for you, play jingoistic
nationalism because we human beings seem
to be particularly um attentive to that
one. And so that if you focus on that,
maybe the Chinese people won't look at
the ethical lapses of the Communist
Party or the fact that their paychecks
aren't going anywhere anymore. So good
old shei, he doesn't have a marketable
ideology anymore. And what's really
scary
is Confucianism had just been this
enduring feature of China. The dynasties
came and went, but Confucianism stayed
until um China was unable to fend off
Japan in the first Son ofJapanese war
that I've told you about in the
Europeans in the Opium Wars when all of
a sudden Confucianism just seems totally
inadequate. And so when enough Chinese
cease believing in Confucianism, that's
when you get the 1911 revolution and it
just vanishes as a organizing principle
for running your government. And this is
the total uh nightmare. One of the
frightening things for the communist
party is um when people cease believing
in communism. So when China's nightmare
scenario is uh these horrible periods of
chaos, they're afraid of if the
communists go that China's going to
devolve into these civil wars, these
periods of one. And there a second one
is that maybe Russia the f or the Soviet
Union when it's shattered that may well
be their fate that maybe these communist
regimes can't last forever. So Russia's
nightmare scenario is other people
invading Russia. China's uh nightmare uh
scenario is the collapse of China. It's
uh two different ways two different
things to worry about. And the Chinese
face a conundrum. If you no longer
believe the economic theories on which
communism is based, well, how do you
justify one party rule? And the
Communist Party has tried to soldier on
without solving that problem. And um
they Chinese have I think learned a
great deal from watching Russians as
they play around with big ideas. And um
I think they learned a great deal from
Mikail Gorbachoff when he tries to uh
fix communism, but he winds up killing
the patient. And uh the Chinese I think
uh their takeaways from what Gorbachoff
did is don't hesitate to deploy the
tanks. If you got unrest in the streets,
you just send tanks. Tanks against
civilians. It's a really quick fix. And
make you want to focus on economic
reforms to the extent you can. Certainly
not political reforms. And you really
want to cify your minorities. Why? Uh in
the Soviet Union, the Russians had had
this fiction that all these occupied
minority people uh wanted to be there
and had equal rights. And so they would
sponsor all the nice folk dances and the
language classes and they'd have a bunch
of token minorities in traditional dress
and various political institutions, but
basically they had no power. But it
meant when the Soviet Union shattered
there were plausible divisions already
set there set up on an e uh an ethnic
basis and that is how you get places
like Usuzbekiststan, Tajikan etc.
China's like no way. So this helps
explain the genocide of the the weaguers
that's ongoing now. I think this is
their rationale for doing it. And then
what you want to do, you can see
Shinping doing it, is you want to pri
prioritize maintaining the monopoly of
the Chinese Communist Party over
economic efficiency when those two
things run at cross purposes. And that I
think helps explain some of Xiinping's
growth depressing choices that he's
making. What the Gorbachoff discovered
when he tried to reform communism is
that democracy and communism just don't
mix. If you give people elections,
they're going to support multiple
parties. Also, when the communist track
record uh becomes known of their
incompetent economic management, uh
summary executions, famines, just all
the things that they've been up to. Uh
it's very hard for them to remain in
power. Also, as Gorbachov discovered,
democracy and empire don't mix. When you
give different minorities a choice a
choice of whether or places a choice to
leave or stay, they bolt. And there is a
consensus among the Han, the
preponderant ethnic group in China that
they want to maintain the empire. So
they don't care how many Tibetans
emulate themselves, right? That's no
longer going on now because uh the
mortar has descended into Tibet and they
don't care how many Mongols complain
about lost lands. The Han want to keep
it. Also for the generation that
survived the cultural revolution, which
would be Xiinping, he's precisely that
age group. They do not ever want to go
back to the chaos. the Luan of the
cultural revolution. It was horrendous.
So expect them to prioritize stability
over liberty. And this brings a third
problem. If democracy and communism
don't mix and democracy and empire don't
mix, okay, in a internet
cell phone age and people are much more
interconnected, how does a government
maintain legitimacy to rule? Because
elections are an incredibly powerful way
to give authority to a government. And
this is where nationalism comes in. And
the Chinese Communist Party and the
Russians likewise are trying to use
jingoistic nationalism to stoke up
popular loyalties and also to deflect
people from domestic problems to go,
"Oh, look at the hated outsiders."
Right? And uh they aren't the only
country to do this sort of thing is you
blame outsiders. It's all the immigrants
fault or whatever. And uh the problem
with all of this
um when the Chinese did it is in 1980
right after the tenement massacre the
Chinese Communist Party decided to
rewrite all the textbooks. So they're no
longer going to focus on class enemies
but they're going to be focused to use
jingoistic nationalism. They're going to
focus on evil Japanese, evil Americans
and focus things that way. Well, the
problem with nationalism is it's a very
uh heady drink. If you embive too much,
it clouds the judgment. Moreover, it
repels minority people within China's
empire who are not interested in Han
nationalism. It frightens neighbors to
think to equ coordinate with each other
and think find big powers to
counterbalance this mess. And it also
impedes the deescalation of unforeseen
um international dust stops or crises.
So with Putin's latest adventures, one
would assume that the Chinese have some
real thoughts about what's going on now.
And in Putin's case, he has thrown away
the Soviet addendum to the rules for
Continental Empire. What was that one?
No hot wars. If you think about Soviet
rulers, they were all uh veterans of
World War II through Leoned Brev.
And they understood that war is easy to
get into, hard to get out of, very
unpredictable. So it's for them it was
proxy wars and they loved it when the
United States got into hot wars. What is
not to like about the Korean War and the
Vietnam War with the United States just
tied down and Americans tearing each
other's eyes out about these things?
Great, great, great. Russians stayed out
of it until after Brev's stroke, which
that's when they make the big boo boo in
Afghanistan and they they go into
Afghanistan and then all of a sudden we
have loads of fun giving stinger
missiles to the other sides inflicting
costs on the Russians and the person who
wanted to get into Afghanistan is Yuri
Andropov who was not a veteran. The
uniformed military of Russia said don't
go into Afghanistan. And while Andropov
and friends ignored it, did their thing.
If you look at Putin, he has risen to
power on a diet of hot wars. He comes to
power in the early phase of the second
Chchin war where he levels the Chetchin
capital of Grony and leaves most of the
rest of Chachchna an environmental waste
zone. Uh but he sorts that one out. And
then he gets quite popular for his war
with Georgia in 2008 where he detaches
South Oishan Khaza from Georgia. Now he
wants to build a naval base in Okazia
because he's he's having trouble with
his base on Crimea. And then uh when he
eliminates term limits for himself in
2012, which isn't very popular in
Russia, he solves that by going into
Ukraine in 2014 and walks off with about
7% of Ukrainian territory at very little
cost. And Russians think that's great.
So if you look at these little stepping
stones, this is the way continentalists
look at it. You got all these little
places lined up. Uh you want to color it
in. And that's where Ukraine comes in in
in 2022.
So Putin wants to reverse all these
territorial losses. He wants the the
green things and the purple things. And
I don't know if he wants to do the
Napoleonic wars, I suppose, go all the
way to Paris. Who knows? And here's how
he looks at NATO or doesn't look at it.
Uh NATO, you can look at when people
join. There are two great big periods of
accession to NATO. One is in the early
Cold War when all the smaller countries
of Europe, which is everybody, right?
We're all smaller than Russia, but the
Europeans join to protect themselves
from Soviet imperialism. And then at the
end of the Cold War, when these Soviet
satellites can finally slip the leash,
I've given you all the reasons why, they
um stampede into NATO. It is not NATO
tricking them to join. They're
stampeding in for excellent reasons.
They've been proven right. And then uh
with Putin when he does works his magic
the second time we're in Ukraine in
2022. This is when the Finns and the
Swedes decide neutrality is not going to
cut it. We got to join NATO. But when
Putin looks at this, he goes, "Oh,
they're coming at us in arcs." Well,
this is uh ludicrous. Russia has posed
an existential threat to these places
forever. No one today wants to invade
Russia. Who'd want it? It's full of
Russians. We want them to stay home,
right? [snorts] There's no one there who
wants Russia. So, the Russians like to
gaslight everybody else like you're the
problem. It's been very effective. Lots
of Americans will talk about NATO
expansion and say, "Oh, this is why
Putin went to Ukraine. It's you did NATO
expansion." He's gaslighting everybody.
Uh Russians are the problem. And also it
is their totally dysfunctional domestic
system that offers everybody else
nothing but problems instead of focusing
on that and fixing it so they can be a
productive member uh of uh the rest of
the world. They're not doing that.
They're just invading other people. So
back to the real problem. What are the
prospects of a bromance with these two?
Barring World War II, which would be the
great powers go at it. If the great
powers go at it, you might well
superglue these two. And then if that
happens, whatever side is losing might
well use a nuclear weapon. And then
we're going to have toxic plumes
everywhere. So we had better get our de
our diplomacy right because there are
really serious consequences for getting
it wrong in this particular era. We're
at the beginning of a second cold war
with a leadership that has not been
chasened by surviving World War I, the
Great Depression, and World War II,
which are the grown-ups who did a very
effective job dealing with the early
First Cold War. We haven't got those
people anymore. So, if you look at um
primary adversaries, primary theaters,
you don't want them to align for your
enemies because if they do, it'll be
they'll coordinate. Current currently,
Vlad the Bad has a Ukraine fixation.
Xiinping has got a Taiwan fixation
opposite ends of Eurasia. Xiinping is
also causing India problems and doing
Southside China Sea Island but uh
building but they're they're an opposite
ends of their two empires. So so far
nothing aligns with these two and even
in a world war it's the their primary
theaters probably would not align the
same way that the Axis primary theaters
did not align. and they might well
disperse their resources in different
directions. But the problem was we have
a lot of people with nuclear weapons
now. You really don't want to do the hot
war. So if um
the west and others manage things
correctly, I've given you a huge
historical legacy of fraught relations.
Uh play your cards uh appropriately and
these two will take care of each other
and um the rest of us can if we do it
right. don't launch trade wars on each
other, but rather try to maximize our
prosperity so that we get stronger and
stronger while they're busy in these
wealth destroying wars. And Putin is
just blowing through all of his assets
in Ukraine to no purpose. Uh that that's
how we fought and won the the last cold
war. Putin, he's trying to do empire in
the age of nationalism. Well, it's a
non-starter
and he's dumping all of his ordinance on
Ukraine, leaving Siberia wide open. And
Xi Jinping has moved right in even
before the Ukraine war. That's this belt
road initiative is peeling away the
former Russian sphere of influence in
Central Asia. And Putin is doing this
hot war gambit when Russia's weak and
China is strong, making it particularly
damaging. And you go, well, why would it
matter? Well,
uh, Russia has precisely Siberia has
precisely the resources that China now
needs and covets and wants to have them
contiguous so other people can't mess
with them. And in particularly, they
want water because they've blown through
their water table in North China and
Lake Bal has over 20% of the world's
surface freshwater. So, if you want a
quick fix, it's the best one. And China
is known for big water projects. They've
been damning the Meong and the Yangsa.
They've done massive water projects. So,
um that may be in Russia's future. Who
knows? Um
and Xiinping now holds all of the cards.
Uh China has nine times the population,
nine times the GMP of Russia, and their
per capita GMPs are uh converging. Not
good news for Putin. So, I think that
the question isn't whether this uh
bromance is going to last forever, but
rather when it's going to end. When is
Xiinping going to decide he's got the
right amount of leverage to get whatever
it is he wants. And um I think what's
going on now illustrates the the perils
of getting your primary adversary wrong.
Nicholas II fought a recreational war
against Japan, the Russo-Japanese war of
1904, 1905. He is pouring resources into
really an irrelevant theater in those
days instead of taking those resources
and putting it into a railway system
that European Russia desperately needed
to face off Germany, which it does
within the decade and loses. Uh he is
overthrown in part because of bread
riots in St. Petersburg because no
foreign aid can get in because he has
inadequate railway system. They'll be
built later and they'll be good for Len
Lease. So he and his family wind up shot
in a Siberian basement. It takes a
decade to play out. So uh I don't know
how it's going to go for Vladimir Putin
uh on all of this. Uh if we play our
cards right, uh maybe he'll go away as
lonesome. We may have to wait a long
time. On the other hand, if we get into
a hot war, nuclear war, or and in the
meantime, if the United States kills off
its alliance system, which is its great,
one of its greatest strengths by doing a
gratuitous trade war on our allies and
then we have a dust up with China. Well,
let's think about this. Japan tried this
uh go it alone my way or the highway
strategy with China back in World War
II, right? When China was a failed state
and it wrecked Japan. China now has a
population that's a multiple of ours, an
industrial base that's a multiple of
ours. Why on earth would you ever want
to take on them alone?
So, I'm going to quote Pericles who was
uh the leader of Athens at its height uh
when it was uh building all these
ancient ruins that weren't ruins when
they were being built, right? They're
gone. And he was uh he this warning came
on on the eve of a succession of
Athenian blunders and uh ancient Athens
never recovered. I am more afraid of our
own blunders than of the enemy's
devices. Our leaders truly need to
ponder this before they wreck all of us,
themselves included. So, thank you for
your attention. That's what I have to
say about Sinos Soviet things.
>> Public benchmarks can be useful, but
they don't always measure what you think
they do. Take Amy or HMMT, which both
contain extremely challenging
competition level math problems. Now,
Libox's researchers found that some of
the larger models were brute forcing
their answers through repeated trial and
error and they were sidest stepping the
very kind of mathematical reasoning that
these benchmarks were designed to test
in the first place. And on top of this,
some of the questions had actually
leaked into the model's training data.
So, when labelbox researchers swapped in
fresh equally challenging problems, the
scores plummeted and in many cases by
more than 40%. [music] So when a
Labelbox customer wanted to improve
their models math capabilities, Labelbox
brought in a team of previous Math
Olympiad winners to develop brand new
Amy and HMMT style problems that the
models couldn't have possibly memorized
along with clever variations that made
brute force approaches computationally
infeasible for the model. Labelbox also
mapped out the model strengths and
weaknesses. For example, was it better
at domains like cominatorics or algebra
and weighted the final fine-tuned data
towards the areas that needed the most
work? There's no shortcut here. Labelbox
just scrutinized benchmarks at the
single data row level to ensure that
their customers models were learning and
improving as effectively as possible.
You can learn more at
labelbox.com/warcash.
Okay, first question. I want to
understand the role of ideology in the
SOSIviet split. So these are the two
major communist countries in the world.
They have this big ideological world
changing mission. We're going to spread
communism around the world. And that
isn't enough to prevent some war over in
19 the case of 1969 literally just
islands in the middle of a river, right?
There's like nothing super consequential
at stake here. So why didn't the fact
that they were both these communist
countries do more to cement the
relationship? Well, I gave you all these
bad things that Russia had done to
China, which are they're not small
things. And then isn't the problem with
communism is that the economics of it
don't actually work. And uh that
fundamentally these two countries are
continental powers. They're continental
empires. And sure, they change out uh
ideologies.
uh the ideology of the Jazar changes out
to communism and China is changing out
Confucianism for communism. But the
principle that each one should be king
of the roost that hasn't changed and
that would be a mutually exclusive
proposition of who's going to run uh
Asia and then Eurasia, right? Because
they they have a a shared address,
right? this long border and also
communism, you're supposed to have a
whole it's supposed to take over the
whole world, right?
>> And we're supposed to have a classless
society, right? And that's why we don't
even worry about governments and things
because they're eventually going to melt
away. Well, that's all nonsense.
And uh as things go on further and
further, you have dictators more and
more entrenched. And they're and they're
using communism which there's another
piece where it's just amazing about the
big lie. I don't whether Stalin said
something if the lie is big enough
people will believe you that it's just
so out there it's so preposterous they
go with it which is this notion that the
Soviet Union is that it's the west that
are these imperial powers right and we
buy this that they're not the ones but
if you look at it I've given you the
data um and then this other one in our
own time this lie about oh it's the west
it's NATO expansion this explains Putin
I've given you the data It's nonsense.
It's now why the Russians feel obliged
to take other people's territory. Part
of it is this feeling good while other
people squirm. There's that aspect. And
they're not the only people who do those
sorts of things. Um but it's also from
this uh being on the plains of Eurasia
over history. People have invaded you.
And so you have an established paradigm
of how you deal with other people that
is deep-seated over thousands of years.
So I can't totally answer the question
because there are a lot of Russians and
a lot of Chinese whose decisions
together aggregate to what they do.
>> So I want to understand say Stalin's
decisions in particular in um in the
case of telling the communists during
the Chinese civil war that you can go
below the Yangze River so that he can
split out the Chinese and sorry the
communist and the nationalists in China
and leave China weak. So we know from
all the actions in Stalin's life that he
was a devoted communist, right? He does
collectivization and almost destroys his
regime because he's a devoted communist
at the same time. And so communism says
that there has to be this worldwide
revolution at some point if there is a
worldwide revolution. Um there will be
other powerful communist countries. So
that's implied in the nature of what a
worldwide communist revolution is. But
at the same time, he's you know he
doesn't seem communist enough to want
China to become fully communist. He like
cares more about real geopolitic. Um so
yeah tell me about how
>> his version of communism is Russians
invented it or actually they didn't Marx
invented it but they are the guys who
think well we operationalized it so we
should run it forever. So of course it's
going to be Russia is going to be the
big communist country. So a bunch of
Chinese upstarts from their point of
view are claiming uh no no it's we're
going to run the show. Uh-uh. But did
Stalin so as a communist he thought okay
there's going to be at some point
>> the whole world is going to be communist
and he thought that he personally would
be managing the whole world.
>> Uh unclear cuz in his lifetime right cuz
it's a long horizon uh in his lifetime
he's about uh initially communism in one
country right and then communism on your
borders which is what he's working on.
Uh as for the the rest of the world, it
takes BRNF to start going all deep into
Africa. In fact, Stalin wasn't
interested in say India because he
thought they're a bunch of lackeyis of
the British, right? How do they let
themselves be colonized by the British?
There's something wrong with them. So I
you have to also think about where
history is at a given moment. So he dies
in 53. It's not that long after World
War II of how it's all going to turn out
and things his um relationship with
China as far as he's concerned is going
swimmingly when he's in power. Mao goes
there and basically cowtows in Moscow
and does what Stalin wants him to do.
That that's Stalin's experience until he
I don't know chokes on his Cheerios or
whatever happened to him that morning.
>> If Stalin hadn't died, do you think a
Sinos Soviet split was still inevitable?
Because yes, there wouldn't have been
Kruev's secret speech. Obviously, Stalin
wouldn't have condemned the cult of
personality, but the the uh the
grievances you mentioned would still
exist.
>> I think the grievances would still
exist. I think Stalin's death, dictators
death profoundly weaken their systems
because they've got no good succession.
So, it means you're guaranteed a a cat
fight royale going on. And so I mean
that's what you one waits for for when
Putin eventually the man will die one
way or another and there will be a
catfight royale for what happens to him.
So I don't know Stalin was a pretty old
enough guy when he died and Russians
have had in those days had a pretty
lousy diet and I can't remember if he
smoked. His generation mostly did. So um
I don't know the uh how the future would
have run with uh good old uncle Joe
there for longer. I cannot the Korean
war would have still gone on longer.
It's really his death why that war ends.
>> Um so and then with the Korean War goes
on and on and on. I don't know what the
implications are for us or for Mao. M
this I think is a really interesting
thing to consider um from this lecture
that um you know in retrospect maybe one
of the most important things if not the
most important thing that happened in
the 20th century is the Chinese civil
war um at the time you know just you
wouldn't think of this as a ma
especially world war II has just
happened you wouldn't think of this as
if you were living in 1948 or 1949 you
wouldn't think of this as a main thing
happening in the world but given that we
know in retrospect this is a really big
country with huge population, we should
be paying a lot of attention to its
internal political development. And I
wonder if we should apply the same logic
today where there's other countries with
huge populations where we don't think a
lot about what's happening there. India
or Nigeria. I mean, I I really couldn't
tell you the first thing about Nigeria
even though I know that it's a big
country with a huge population.
>> Let's not try cuz I don't know anything
about it either. [laughter]
>> Yeah. But um on the China the uh Chinese
civil war there was an understanding
that it was a really big deal and that's
why Roosevelt and the British are just
thinking he's laughable. He keeps trying
to treat China like a a great power and
the British are going they're not a
great power Franklin not remotely but he
wants to bring them into the uh the
Cairo conference or wherever the one he
brings them in. And he also wants to
include them as the big uh he wants them
to be a veto uh member wielding member
of the United Nations which by China's
military status there's just no way that
uh but Roosevelt is looking there's no
Japan out there we want to have
something in Asia to counter balance but
then when you get to the Chinese civil
war Americans who are have fought some
big wars they're looking at it going it
is not feasible for us to alter this
outcome and uh therefore um the thinking
was I think it was the Eisenhower
archives anyway that um uh that if you
they lived together long enough they
would go at each other eventually.
>> Okay, I want to zoom in on one
particular episode during this period
that I think is fascinating. So in 1936,
the communists in China kidnap Shank
Kaishek, who is the leader of the
nationalist,
>> and they're about to kill him, and
Stalin uh radios in over the common term
and he says, "No, you can't kill Shen
Kai-shek. Uh even though he's your
enemy, he's been massacring you. Um you
had to let him go." And in exchange,
Shankai has a promise to create a united
front um against the Japanese. Now,
there's 30,000 communist gerillas uh
when they're fighting the Japanese at
this period. and there's 1.5 to 2
million nationalist troops. So the
communists get to claim the prestige of
fighting the Japanese with a fraction of
the effort. Um and this just seems like
a brilliant move in Stalin's part in
retrospect because if if they had killed
Shank Kaishek, the national sources
might have dissolved.
>> There would be a puppet government
installed by Japan. A terrible thing for
Stalin.
>> Um it just seems like Stalin makes a lot
of right calls in the theater in Asia at
this time.
>> Um
>> what is he understanding big picture
that lets him
>> Oh, hold on. There are dictators all
over the world who stay in power for a
long time. Do not dismiss their ability
to stay in power. Uh they're surfing
quite a wave wherever they live, right?
Of of people who uh butcher each other
with great regularity. Um I would
suspect that most and this is suspect
cuz how would I have the evidence uh
that many of these long-term dictators
have EQs that are off the charts, right?
They look in the when you come in the
room, they just gut feeling know whether
they're going to cap you or not. And if
they get a few extra people, so what,
right? Just so they get rid of all the
people who are going to cause them
problems.
>> And uh incredible abilities. Also, what
Stalin does, and I think Saddam Hussein
imitated him, but I could be wrong about
that one, is you have multiple security
agencies with overlapping jurisdictions,
and so no one quite knows who's running
the show and who's in power, but they're
all funneling information to Stalin. So,
he has better information than anybody
else. So, you can use one one day,
another day, which explains how you can
all the heads of whatever, it's the
equivalent of the KGB. It comes and
goes. Most of the early head heads of
that wind up getting shot by their
successors. You'd think they'd notice a
pattern, but [gasps]
uh so they're they're um very good at
staying in power. They're really good at
managing that problem. It does not bring
prosperity. That comes from the uh world
of of maritime trade of going following
by
>> uh international law instead of capping
your trade partner. you're not going to
get a second trade deal if you do that.
Uh it's um just so much more wealth
creating this alternate universe, but
that's not where these continentalists
are.
>> I feel like there's still something a
little underexlained about
>> probably lots of things are under
>> but in in the sense look um Hitler's
another dictator and he does forget
about like having these like moves where
he decides who exact don't kill this
kidnapped person because it'll be a bad
idea in the long run. in the opposite
he's like declaring war against America
even when he doesn't have to right he's
just making these crazy moves where
Stalin is like a special thing to
explain um how does like communism make
you I feel like it's not just communism
it's like something else that's making
him a deaf geopolitical actor
>> but you can do this in retrospect and go
crazy move cuz no one realized that the
US productive base could do what it did
Americans didn't even know right so you
tell me right now how the future's going
to turn out who's g
this is where if you flip When you look
at history, you think it had to turn out
that way because you can reverse
engineer something at least a plausible
story of why you wind up where you did.
And it may not even be the the right
story, but it it yields the correct
answer. So you think you you got it. But
if you look at the future, how's this
thing going to end with Jinping and
Putin? We don't know. And then
afterwards, you go, "Oh, well, something
is profoundly stupid based on subsequent
events, but we don't know now." Right?
And it's because oh well there's a
Russian proverb which is uh
which is someone else's um mind pomi
darkness is that you ultimately don't
know what other people are thinking. You
make your guesses but then they do
things. when you show the maps of China
in 1850, Russia also in 1850, especially
1900. Look, Russia and China are still
big countries today, but if you just
look at Ching dynasty China, it just
like it's overwhelmingly big. Um same
with SARS Russia before the rest of the
toughs treaty
>> also a union
>> it it makes you think that it's um at
various points through history at most
points through history China was
technologically dominant over the west
except during this one crucial period in
this 18th and 19th century with the
industrial revolution in high gear
>> which changes the whole world
>> so just reinforces the idea that how
important it is to be at the
technological frontier especially at
historically kruxy times and of course
we're in San Isco we um many of us here
believe that this is especially
>> cruxy time in sort of the development of
technology. Yeah, maybe we shouldn't we
should continue investing it instead of
cancing all the science uh research
projects and what will be the long-term
effects of doing this right you're
thinking America's great strengths it's
alliance system um our great strength
also used to be being at the head of
innovation so we're going to eliminate
those things and think it's going to go
well for us
>> okay I want to ask about um your I don't
know if you'd call it a prediction But
your hypothesis that at some point China
and Russia will finish each other off or
have some sort of conflict which will be
bad for both of them.
>> They won't finish each other off.
They're too big to be finished off
unless we do a nuclear war then we might
finish all of ourselves off.
>> Yes. But the idea that there will be
some sort of conflict between these two
countries. Um and I I agree with the
idea that look China has a lot of people
and a lot of wealth. Russia has a lot of
water and it has a lot of resources. So
these are sort of complimentary
resources. you'd you know they both have
things that the other party has and so
then the question is will they attain
these things through war or through
trade and it just seems very improbable
to me that you know China's got a lot of
money it can just pay for Russian oil it
can just pay for water why would it
invade uh nuclear armed nations
>> oh I never said it would do that um it's
a question of uh if Putin feels that his
back is up against the wall it's what
price like we don't really know the
terms of their trade on what are the
real energy prices that China is paying
for all of this. I don't know. Uh maybe
uh some people uh do know, but I suspect
that whatever the terms of trade are
going to be, the Chinese are going to
get a really good deal. And then if
Putin is really in fact if you look at
what happened to Gorbachev at the very
end of the cold war. So he his internal
situation it's not he's not going to war
with anyone but his internal situation
is devolving so rapidly because their
economy collapses. He um he's already
got no lousy oil prices. But in
addition, he is um so upset the
centralized planning uh situ system so
that revenues are just collapsing around
him and he's about to be thrown out of
power and so he is desperate for the
kind of loans that the Germans in
particular are willing to give him in
order to get not only Germany reunited
but West Germany stays in NATO. Oh, and
the next thing is East Germany's going
to be in NATO, too. And then NATO can
have whoever. Those things are trades he
never would have made, ever, but he's so
desperate. So, in that case, the West
doesn't likes to pay people. So, instead
of paying him a low price, the West is
paying him a high price to back off. In
China, I suspect it'll be the opposite.
it'll be is that they pay him less and
less for whatever it is he wants if he
really corners himself continues to
corner himself in Ukraine that these
terms of trade will get more and more in
China's favor
>> I guess does that look like the bromance
ending right so North Korea is an incre
increasingly or has been for decades in
a very desperate position where
>> that's quite a bromance
>> well but like
>> if [laughter] that's how you wind up
>> you know there there's no risk of North
Korea and China going to a war I mean
North Korea relies heavily on China.
Yeah, it's not it's not draining China
in any way.
>> Oh, it's the other way around. That's
what Russia's future may be. And and
apparently certain Russians when Putin
had invaded the big way in Ukraine said,
"Oh, oh my god, that's our future. It's
North Korea. That's where we're headed."
>> Yeah, that could well be their future.
it'll just keep going and uh as they
pour out wealth and the Chinese will try
to get a very good terms of trade for
resources and be niggerly uh meaning can
give very few uh things back.
>> Mhm. In 1931 when Japan attacks Manuria,
Japan commandeers uh the Chinese Eastern
Railway which the treaty of Portsouth in
1905 said that it was supposed to be
under Russia's purview. Um, and the
people in the poly bureau are telling
Stalin, look, we got to we got to be
aggressive against this. And Stalin
says, look, I don't want I don't want to
raise tensions against another great
power. Let's just let this slide. Let's
keep tensions low. And this is actually
quite similar to what happens with
splitting up Poland in 1939. And then
Barbar Roa, where in both theaters, he
makes this calculation that I'm going to
let certain things slide so that I don't
have to face off against this great
powers on my border. I don't want to go
to war with them. In the case of Japan,
it works because Japan decides to attack
China and not Russia. In the case of
obviously Germany, it doesn't work.
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. In Germany, he's trying
to run the same script on Right. Um, and
he thinks that this is going to work for
him, but that's what the Molotov
Ribbentrop pact is about. And, uh, uh,
not remotely. He needed to read Minecom
to understand it's no, you're a menu
item for Hitler. he's eventually going
to come around. And also, I think it's
in our own day where we don't really
want to absorb the bad news. Like, I
could be wrong, but I believe that uh
Putin wants uh not only all of Ukraine,
which he says he wants, but also he
wants the Baltic states, and he wants to
keep on going. And so this is profoundly
bad news because if that's the case then
it means for Europeans at least they're
going to have to be diverting all kinds
of resources to this problem which is
something they don't want to do right
because like us uh they're indebted too
and there are other things they would
prefer to spend their money on and we
don't like the bad news that actually uh
this is where we're at and so you got to
make nasty tradeoffs. So Stalin tries to
work the same magic.
>> Stalin thinks it's going to work for him
and he doesn't get it. He becomes the
menu item for Hitler
>> and it it just about wrecks him. But it
works beautifully against uh
>> so it's just interesting to see like oh
it kind of makes sense why he thought it
would work because otherwise operation
his failure to anticipate operation
Barbaro. you know, he when he's getting
information that the Germans are lining
up millions of men along this huge
border, he's like, "This is British and
disinformation." And he he uses the
exact same logic when um Japan is
invading Manuria, that like the idea
that we had to fight Japan is British
information, disinformation, sorry. Um
so even though obviously it was a
mistake, it helps us understand why he
thought this way.
>> Well, I think there's another concept
that's useful is cooperative adversary.
It and I've introduced this before. or
it doesn't mean the adversary wants to
cooperate with you, but they just don't
play their cards particularly well. So,
we're talking about China that has had
all of those rebellions I told you about
and civil wars and regional wars. Uh it
it doesn't have these strong government
institutions.
So, it is much easier to script write a
place like that to have them do things
that are anothetical to their uh
interests. So, you got a cooperative
adversary. Chinese aren't trying to
cooperate, but from a Russian point of
view, they might be a cooperative
adversary versus Hitler, whereas Germany
has all kinds of institutions and all
kinds of well-educated people. And so
that uh Hudwink Hitler is going to be
much more difficult than whoever he's
dealing with in China in this period. M
an interesting uh connection to make
between World War II and this Russo
Chinese relationship is that the way
that we used Russia as basically this um
reservoir of uh of military men that we
can just like ship ship armaments to and
they can do the dying for us is similar
to how Russia uses China in the war
against Japan. is that well they're not
actually during that war shipping that
much to China but no during the Korean
war.
>> Yeah. Korean war. Yes.
>> Yeah. So there's this interestingly
Russia is doing to them how the the kind
of alliance that we had with Russia
during World War II.
>> Well think about today. It's like the
Korean War in reverse cuz China's
dribbling out aid to Russia. Russia's
actually getting wrecked by Ukraine,
right? the death rate is uh Russia's got
what is it three times the population or
something of Ukraine but it's the death
rate that it's suffering is really high
and these are only children uh this is
no longer the uh 10 children six
children peasant families in Russia
>> and uh it's look at it from Xiinping oh
the longer this goes on it the better
just let Putin keep on working his magic
and I get to sell him stuff I'll get him
to lower the prices of resources is cuz
the man's desperate and Putin will find
himself under a Chinese yoke that he
does not like and then at some point the
Russians will uh reassess and I don't
think they'll like that. I don't The
Russians fancy themselves being
Europeans and have a whole uh I believe
racist package that goes with the
Chinese so that they won't like that
whole uh situation. I don't know how
long it takes them to do whatever
they're going to do. So uh a lot of
things in foreign policy you're not
going to solve it. You're not going to
they're huge countries. There's no way
you're going to solve it. But you need
to figure out how to manage it. So in to
have a blast shield so that whatever u
fallout comes from their toxic whatever
they're doing it minimizes how it hits
your friends and partners. And this is
why uh you should be focusing on
maximizing the economic growth of your
friends and partners because that is the
only effective way to deal with them if
you go it alone. I mean who deals with a
bully alone? Always gang up on them,
right? I mean really, why would you ever
want to go alone with a bully? You'd
want to go in with lots of friends. And
this is what the World War II
generation. So the Marshall plan, you
look at it, you could never get
something through that like Congress
now, right? And yet it's passed
overwhelmingly in Congress because
people get it that you have to spend a
real money and then the European
economies recover. How are they going to
do it? Buying our stuff. It's a
tremendous win-win. So in strategy, you
want to figure out win-win things
instead of these zero someum things
where oh I invite you over, I humiliate
you. I feel good and then you're mad
forever. It just
it's pointless.
>> Raiden note to close on.
>> Oh, don't humiliate people. Be kind to
each other. Yes.
>> Well, it it's a good call back because
I've been asking you all these naive
questions and you've been very kind to
not humiliate me. So, [laughter]
um, thank you all very much for coming.
It is, it is so fun to be able to do
these things with a live audience, um,
and not trapped inside a dark studio
room. Um, we hope, uh, I hope we see you
guys again on Friday when we're doing
the lecture on the proper way to do war
termination and then next Tuesday which
is about um, why Russia lost the cold
war. See you on Friday. Thank you,
Sarah.
>> Hey everybody, I hope you enjoyed that
episode. If you did, the most helpful
thing you can do is just share it with
other people who you think might enjoy
it. It's also helpful if you leave a
rating or a comment on whatever platform
you're listening on. If you're
interested in sponsoring the podcast,
you can reach [music] out
at.com/advertise.
Otherwise, I'll see you on the next one.